my framework is this is a long-term
trend right we've got at least another
decade in this at least
probably two or three decades but this
part of it is going to continue to do
very well sure bitcoin over time as it
gets more users more adopted it won't go
up as much each cycle
but there'll be plenty of others and
plenty of
opportunities so what we should be doing
is using this
thinking of the money you put in as your
retirement money
and writing it off
um and then just adding
if you've got money
in a bear market now the problem is is
most of us don't in a recession
but a friend of mine taught me very
early on he said
ralph is a key thing i've learned is he
who has cash in a recession is king
so that's that combination of income
and opportunity
[Music]
rao powell welcome back to the show
it's fantastic to be back it's been a
while
it's been a minute man and circumstances
have changed since we last spoke
and uh i'm actually really excited to
talk to you about things given that
you've got
bankers predicting global recession
economists predicting global recession
is there a way for people to
really thrive in this time in this you
know sort of moment of crazy disruption
is there an opportunity or do we all
just have to take a shot to the face
well it depends what we're talking about
look i mean they've made it clear the
central banks and the government that
they want everybody to take a shot to
the face i they want demand to go down
and i think that's already happening
quite fast
right i've heard that i've heard that
said i don't understand demand for what
stuff
so if they raid your if they put up your
mortgage rates you spend less in
restaurants
if you
if you finding your food bills at the
supermarket
are 30 higher than they were
you spend less on something else right
that's not ever good
because it stops the price of goods
rising so the price of goods moves
either because there's not enough supply
which is what we've had a problem with
or it's because there's too much or not
enough demand
so if you've got something with
restricted supply so let's think about
oil right now because of the russian
situation
there is not enough oil for the current
demand out there so the oil price keeps
going up so you and i pay more to drive
our cars or to heat or cool our houses
so
the only way of solving that one because
you can't get the russian oil back into
the market
is to make us
buy use less oil
so that may if you the price does that
automatically because it gets more
expensive we do it but if you can also
then just lower general demand for
things we'll drive our cars less we'll
catch less flights all of that stuff and
that lowers demand and therefore prices
because prices rising inflation
is evil for our savings because the
dollar in your bank account is worth
less than a year's time it's currently
worth eight percent less which is quite
a lot
and so it's it's that it's this weird
situation where we have to take the pain
we're told we can't buy as much and
we're forced into it by rising our
mortgage costs and our food costs and
all of this stuff
and eventually
things will slow down people will be put
out of jobs a bit that kind of stuff and
then the overall demand in the economy
comes down and prices come down
so i we're all collectively taking the
pain for this inflation that was created
out of a whole bunch of different things
from the pandemic through to
supply chain issues through to under
investment in commodities through to the
shift to green energy
um all of these things have created this
moment in time which is
tricky
and you know if we relate it to for
example the crypto market
so why did crypto stop going up
well it was macro economic factors and
people like well what's that got to do
with crypto well really simple
is
it's a retail retail-based market
and about sometime last year prices
started to rise and so people could
afford to dollar cost average less
so then there's less demand for crypto
and the price of crypto falls it's as
simple as that
okay so uh
that all sounds very simple and direct i
think that
what
i wouldn't have understood a year ago
obviously now being into this i have a
bit more of a frame of reference but i
like to think that uh
what i'm able to help people with is
sort of the 101 of like how all this
stuff works
it feels like
the i always thought of the economy as a
thing external to human forces in terms
of intentional human forces as i was
growing up
now i'm beginning to realize that it it
is either rightly or foolishly
the subject of a lot of human
intervention
and so
i would have thought perhaps naively
that the goal would be to let the market
determine like if people are willing to
pay more for oil gas whatever then the
price will rise to what people are
willing to pay and it just is what it is
and so
inflation is going to be a thing that
happens occasionally it is if your wages
go up to match it if not you're just
getting poorer because you can afford to
buy less stuff
with the with you with your monthly
paycheck but why won't the market
balance naturally they're obviously
you're getting poorer but theoretically
it can't just inflate forever because
people can't pay so it'll inflate until
the amount of poor is like too much and
then people stop spending exactly and
then it rebalances and that's called
demand destruction it's exactly the same
process
so the fed can engineer it by trying to
raise interest rates and it filters
through to our mortgages and other stuff
or
the market kind of clears of its own
accord where prices get too much people
stop buying stuff prices full back again
um so either way tends to work and we're
in this
weird mess where
the federal reserve are doing it the
markets are doing it and we're having to
take all the pain in the meantime
and is it better to engineer this it
seems like we at some point crossed a
rubicon and said we're going to engineer
the economy we're not just going to let
it run its course
given how well you understand the macro
landscape do you think that is wise or
would we be better taking a
laissez-faire way getting our hands off
of it and just letting the market do
what the market does
um
i generally think that the market is
better at doing it if you actually see
it you know from my perspective somebody
closely follows interest rate markets
and stuff like that
they did all of the tightening
anyway before well before the fed people
like you hear the expression the fed are
behind the curve what it means is the
bond market's already priced it
like interest rates need to go up to
slow down the economy because there's
too much inflation and the federal
reserve are trying to catch up i
actually think the markets do a pretty
decent job in the way that you suggest
prices rise eventually it gets too
expensive we stop doing it now there's
different equations that people fear is
when it becomes super entrenched in the
economy
and we all go to our bosses and go i
want to pay rise and everybody does that
at the same time that pushes up prices
further you get more wage rises and
that's a you know a wage price spiral
that really has only happened in the u.s
really once
which was um
in the
late 70s early 80s when all of the baby
boomers hit kind of 30 years old at the
same time so if you think when you go
back to 30
you're kind of settling down with
somebody you're probably thinking about
buying a house you're buying a car you
know you've got a job you're starting to
earn some money
all of we had the largest group of
people in all history
turning 30 at the same time
and they all did the same thing and
bought the same stuff and that really
pushed up prices
and that was at the same time there was
issues with oil supply and other things
so we had this double whammy of a demand
shock and a supply shock which meant
prices went crazy but that's really only
happened once
okay so we've got uh two mechanisms that
are working to adjust the economy you've
got people with their hands in maybe
it's better to not do it
um
but nonetheless we've got the market and
we've got the fed or
human intervention yeah right so
uh we're in a really weird moment right
now we've got
war happening in europe i put that in
air quotes maybe i shouldn't but like we
have war happening in europe or at least
on the cusp of europe
um and that's obviously there's an
economic fight going on between putin
and europe i've heard different things
about whether he's winning uh that
economic war but certainly given their
ability to export
natural gas i think is their primary
export uh they're able go ahead yeah
natural gas and crude oil but europe
relies on russian natural gas
okay so you've got them able to disrupt
the market that way we're just coming
out of covid
uh we had a ton of stimulus thrown at
the economy certainly here in the us i
imagine a lot of other countries did
that as well
uh so you've got that was pushing the
inflation narrative if i remember right
though you you'd been saying for quite
some time i actually don't think we're
going to have an inflation
problem at least not in the long term
what is it that you saw
that led you to believe that and i think
part of your answer is going to be
around bond prices and if you can
explain what it means for the bonds to
have priced that in because i don't
understand what that means
okay so my view and it still remains
even though it seems pretty
unfashionable right now with inflation
at eight and a half percent
my view remains exactly what you talked
about is as prices go up
the economy slows down
for the exact mechanism and therefore it
becomes self-regulating and it becomes
that because people are quite in debt
and it's a very old population in the
u.s and europe and elsewhere so if you
raise prices on your retired parents
they can't earn more money because
they've got
a pension and that's it
so what happens is they have end up
buying less and there's a big cohort of
people
so that's why i think it automatically
over time
kind of self-corrects
but the other mechanism is the bond
market which is a fancy name for saying
interest rates the price that you and i
and companies and governments can borrow
so if it becomes more expensive to
borrow so think of your mortgage
if you've got a mortgage well then if it
comes more expensive to borrow then you
spend less
right so the so the interest rate market
forces demand to come lower now let's
say you don't have a mortgage and you're
a renter well the person you rent from
has a mortgage
so they will raise your rent because of
it which is why everybody's feeling this
pain now feeling a bit poorer and that
and that's the issue that's here
okay so bonds if i understand them
correctly
basically somebody's trying to raise
money so often this is a government bond
and so they're saying hey we want to
build a bridge or whatever and so they
offer a bond either at the municipal
level the state level the
national level i assume uh and so you
can buy these different bonds the
government is guaranteeing them
so
but my understanding is that
basically they're going to give you a
return on that money so hey i'm loaning
money to the government
and in return for that they're going to
give me some
interest rate so you said that that's
though the price of borrowing money but
really i'm lending money at least as i
understand it yes
everybody then
if the government can borrow it where is
it today let's say
two years they can borrow at two and a
half percent
so if i give i buy us government bonds
or
i'm getting two and a half percent
now that becomes what's known as the
risk-free rate because the government
can pay you back always
but then if i'm a bank
and tom comes to me for money i'm going
to say well i'm going to look at tom's
credit rating etcetera and i'm going to
say it's
that two and a half percent plus another
one percent which is my
my extra profit for taking the risk
um and so different people will borrow
money at different rates
so it filters through so just because
it's the government it's actually what
everything is benchmarked off
um and so the riskier you are
so if you're just now a 30 year old in
your first job and you've only been
earning a you know a salary for a year
and a half
well you might be able to borrow money
but it's going to be four percent over
that whatever the government borrows it
up because you're riskier or if you're
a start-up and you don't have enough
cash flow well it's going to be higher
than that as well so everything's priced
off that which is why it's so important
it's probably the single most important
factor within how economies play out is
the price of which money gets lent and
borrowed
and well okay so there's a couple of
interesting things here so one i think
it's important to remember and this is
something that
uh i find that i always get the the
hives over when people act like the
government makes money the government
doesn't make money the government taxes
people and gets money from people that
are productive and are earning money so
it's interesting that you're reminding
me that
you we are
we the people are both the borrowers and
the lenders correct so that's very
interesting now who
sets the
bond market interest rate
so it's
set at two levels
one is the what's known as the fed funds
rate
and that is the money that that is the
price of money that the federal reserve
will operate with the banking system
but that is for very short-term money so
it's very risk-free right because
if i'm lending to you for a month it's
not very risky
but if i'm lending to you for 10 years
well then it's riskier so you have
what's known as
um well you have a interest rate curve
i.e the further out you go the higher
the yield generally is that's not always
the case
ahead of recessions actually switches
around and i'll come into that in a bit
so
why is it why is the price of money in
the future
more usually than the price of money now
well because
potentially there's more inflation in
the future there's more uncertainty so i
want to make sure i'm being compensated
to get my money back
and that basically is what the bond
market does all day is figure out what's
the future economic growth and what's
the inflation rate in the future is
there is there like a guy doing that or
no it's it's it's it's the voting of
crowds
so there's a guy doing it well there's a
group of guys and girls at the federal
reserve who set the price of money
but then it's really the free market
that sets the rest and nobody has a say
in it which is why when i talked earlier
about the fed was behind the curve we've
just talked about the yield curve
and the yield curve had already started
pricing in lots of fed hikes i the cost
of money needed to go up to offset the
inflation
and the federal reserve hadn't raised
the cost of money yet so they're now
busy trying to do meet the expectations
of the market it's probably too late
because we've probably already slowed
down the economy anyway
so by too late though that doesn't it
doesn't sound like it's necessarily a
bad thing so
we the economy has slowed itself down
the market has done what the market is
supposed to do so the fed is coming in
behind us now are they going to create
problems now by adjusting that too late
or
um
i think there is a narrative
that says that it's that the fed have to
do this but you and i don't borrow at
fed funds rates the market's already
changed down mortgage costs or whatever
so i think the market does its job but
there's some belief that it has to be
driven by the fed and their fed funds
rate
um
so that is
i think more of a red herring i think
the free market does its job
however they have one more other thing
in their in their arsenal
and that is
the balance sheet printing money or
taking money out of the economy
and they have been printing money for a
long time to offset the pandemic and the
extra borrowing that was required i.e
when they print money they're buying the
bonds of the government so the federal
reserve are buying the bonds of the
government
so it allows the government to borrow
more without causing any problems
um
so
right now they're about to start
tightening quantitative tightening
people hear the terminology and what
that basically is a fancy word for
we're going to take some money out of
the economy
and they're going to take money out or
they're just not going to put as much in
well if they stop quantitative easing
which is the first step which they've
done that's not putting any money in
extra money in when they do quantitative
tightening they take money out so
there's a big pool of money sitting
there
and they say listen we're gonna take
five percent of that out every year
that less money around so what's the
mechanism so if they want to put money
into this system they buy bonds
amongst other things they buy assets but
if they want to take money out
what database are they updating i don't
understand they sell bonds
they sell the bonds that's on their
balance sheet so they have trillions of
dollars of this stuff sitting around
where they've stimulated the economy
and then what they do is push it back
into the economy and the idea is it
pushes up wages or
all the banks have to buy these bonds
now from the government
and so then they buy these bonds and
they've got less money left to
lend and do other activities with do the
banks have to buy the bonds
um there are mechanisms by which they're
essentially forced to buy the bonds
now interesting
so generally speaking it ends up on the
banks
balance sheets
and that makes money more difficult
because they've now put that money into
something right so they have a finite
amount amount of money to lend
the fed more or less forces them to buy
some of these bonds that they had
originally purchased so now the bank's
amount of money to lend has become less
which means they're going to scrutinize
the people that they lend to more which
means that they're going to raise the
rates at which they lend them i'm
assuming because they can
okay
man money's [__] weird uh
it is it is weird but if you break it
down to the human element
i'm gonna lend you money when i've got
plenty of it
and if you're desperately in need of it
because you're going through hard times
you'll pay anything for it
and if you kind of
would like to
to borrow some money but aren't
desperate you'll pay a lower rate it's
basically as simple as that
you know the transaction between two
people is the same thing
so if a mate of yours comes to you and
you know they're a terrible creditor but
he's a friend
you're gonna have to set an interest
rate that maybe
to make sure
that you get compensated for the risk
you're taking and if you don't have much
money because you're feeling a bit tight
yourself
you're either not going to lend it to
him or charge a bit more money because
you could have used that money for
something else or lending less and i'm
certainly going to be more scrutinous of
whether i'd lend it to him yeah okay so
that makes a lot of sense now you said
something earlier you actually said a
couple things i'm going to plant the
flag in the hope that i remember this
you slipped one thing in which was
uh that
going green is part of the sort of
inflationary stress so that's
interesting i want to come back to that
um but first i want to talk about
um
debt so you said that
we've never been as in debt as we are
now or the baby boomers just because of
the the size of the population even
though they came into a situation where
they almost couldn't lose with things
like all-time lows housing costs all of
that interest rates it was amazing great
time they thrive millennials come in
it's the exact reverse
but even
though they were in such an amazing
situation they still ended up getting
themselves extraordinarily in debt
i want to give you a quote from somebody
that uh you may know his name is rao
powell and he said
uh
this is such a great quote humans love
leverage above all things sex and
leverage are the two things that drive
humans
uh
so
what what
why why are we so fiendish about
leverage and what does it do for us that
makes it so intoxicating so
leverage allows you to borrow future
money
to use now
so at two levels
is
humans are terrible we just want
everything now
we don't want to work for it if i can
borrow it and buy that
rolex watch of my new car right we're
trying to meet our future expectations
of ourselves always that's what drives
humans
so that's why they use leverage and it's
the same with investments
so they do it for purchasing purchasing
power
to bring that future expectations of
themselves have i earned enough money to
buy that car no but if i borrow money i
can get my future self here it's kind of
a trade-off because you're actually in
debt and now owe somebody you don't
actually own the car
you own the ability to use the car until
you pay that off it's the same with a
house really
and the other point is for investments
you know people love to borrow money now
because then you can make a bigger
investment now
but the trade-off is is what happens if
that goes wrong
then before you know you get a margin
call or liquidate it and you know that's
a feature we see a lot in the crypto
markets for example that happens kind of
automatically
so
humans just love this stuff because it
brings their future expectations of
themselves closer i could be richer i
could have more stuff than i deserve now
from my income
yeah so dicey and you had said in our
last interview
don't do this on leverage and that was
the one thing so i lived uh the
i'll call it the lucky side of leverage
so
i forget what year this was probably
2006 so for everybody that knows the
drama that happens in 2008 in 2006
uh my wife which is a whole another
thing about women and nesting and all of
that she convinces me to spend more than
i was really comfortable spending on a
house but this was like the height of
because this was the future expectation
of yourselves now saying we deserve this
big house
yeah and i'll borrow some money to do it
exactly and uh so this was when you
could literally just they didn't even
like research you they were just giving
loans out like crazy and so we got a
variable interest mortgage and i thought
oh a hundred percent within whatever
five years i'm gonna be making way more
than i'm making now i'm gonna better
myself this is amazing
and so i did and as it turns out i ended
up making way more money than i had been
making and so all was well and we were
able to refinance and it was no problem
but obviously for the vast majority of
the world it was a bloodbath now because
i felt like whoa
i i bet on myself yay but like i
realized only in hindsight how risky it
was
and so now i don't [__] with leverage at
all i don't do anything on leverage like
it terrifies the life out of me i'm the
same i'm terrified of leverage oh my god
and like even michael saylor who i have
just a freakish amount of respect for
when i look at that he took on leverage
to do the the bitcoin buying now his
number was very low so we still have a
long way to go before michael saylor has
to worry about being liquidated
but all of that made me
want to sit down and figure out what
does liquidation look like because i
didn't even understand like i understood
a variable interest mortgage rate where
hey at a certain date the you know the
rate of the mortgage goes from whatever
five percent to 15 percent and that's
going to be a much bigger payment that i
could understand but i didn't understand
liquidation
so
as it pertains to a mortgage which
may be the easier one to understand and
once we understand that we can go to how
people get themselves in trouble with
crypto but what does liquidation look
like if i have the house and my interest
rate isn't going up because it's a fixed
interest rate how could i ever get in
trouble
you can get in trouble
if
you can't pay your interest so let's say
the economy slows down and you lose your
job
now what seemed like a reasonable
payment suddenly becomes impossible
and then in arrears and then you get the
little tap on his shoulder which is like
i'd like that house back now
because you don't own that house
we the bank do
this is what people don't understand
with leverage you don't own that thing
you only own it when you pay it off
so that's what happens when you lose
your job you then can't afford to pay
your mortgage payments now there's a
difference between the us and
europe for this
so the u.s you give the keys back to the
bank
it's not the end of the world in europe
the debt stays with you oh god
yeah
it's very different
so it is a they get the house back and
you still owe the debt correct because
the house is valued less particularly
when what you get what we refer to as
negative equity i you buy a house for
300 grand and it's now worth 200 grand
you owe the bank
100 grand now it's okay
if you can still make the payments and
eventually just pay off the mortgage but
the moment you can't they're like
well you owe us a hundred grand
and they take you to court and you carry
that and you go to bankruptcy
and that's how um housing is rare in the
u.s
um most other leverage doesn't have the
same process
most of the leverage get the tap on the
shoulder saying i want my money back
and uh you end up going to court and you
end up going bankrupt but you're never
going to lose the house as long as i can
make my payments even if the value of
the house changes because
you get in the bank could actually get
into a pretty dicey situation where
let's say the house was valued at 300
000 when i initially bought it it drops
down to 200 000. if i'm making my
payments the amount of collateral could
have changed such that they're actually
not in a good position but as long as
i'm making my payments there's nothing
they can do right correct okay
now when we get to crypto
it's different right because i'm not
making any payments so
what is it or am i making payments how
does leverage work in crypto
so leverage works in crypto that you
have some bitcoin
and you want to borrow some more bitcoin
or some us dollars or whatever it is you
want to do
so you will pledge
your bitcoin
and your interest payment is collateral
as collateral and your interest payments
are whatever they are
but what happens is if the collateral
falls
and the
exchange or whoever it is
or the d5 protocol says
oh it doesn't cover the amount you get
liquidated immediately there's no
negotiation
no oh please no nothing just like boom
out and you take the loss
because they're saying hey you've
reached the point at which
the what you owe us the value of what
you owe us
has now been reached and so if i don't
take this back now i run the risk of it
dropping even lower and now i'm out and
i'm not going to let that happen so it's
like a house you can repossess
instantaneously correct
and now you're out of the market you
don't get a like if it dipped down even
like a penny it's gone and so now if it
bounced back up you're still done gone
out of the market that's right whoa
okay
but you're you're never going to end up
owing because they're just going to
liquidate you right at the moment
correct so when you go into the
financial markets like the futures
markets
which is mainly for accredited or
sophisticated investors
it's not an instant liquidation and
that's terrifying
because suddenly something like the oil
price let's say you've you've bought
some oil futures what that is is a is
leverage on the future price of oil
that's like you would do with bitcoin
but
oil sometimes can go down
10 a day
and before and because you've got
leverage before you know it you're
losing enormous sums of money they don't
liquidate you they call you up and tell
you you owe the margin
and you can get yourself in a huge mess
so leverage is very scary the nice way
of playing leverage is options
options are something definitely worth
people learning about and a lot of
people learnt on robin hood because then
you're only putting up what you can
afford if you say i can afford to lose a
thousand dollars on this bet
it's basically like the instant
liquidation thing and you can only lose
the thousand dollars but you don't lose
your whole underlying position you just
lose the thousand dollars you bet on the
price of something going from here to
there
by whatever date but that's that's an
options bet
yeah i don't know if i want to derail us
trying to
really wrap my head around options uh i
have tried many times you have an option
to buy or sell is that the idea correct
you have the right not the obligation
um is the official terminology but yeah
you have an option to buy and sell
now the amount of money that i put up is
that taken or did i not actually put it
up i only promised to put it you put it
up you put it up okay so you can write
it there it's locked in the system so
boom don't lose anything more than that
got it but futures so i remember um i
don't remember what platform it was on
but this was like a wall street bets
thing on reddit and there were people
kids that just got in way over their
head they ended up owing like you know
75 000 and they killed themselves
and i remember thinking what the hell so
what are you doing in a futures
that can get you in that kind of trouble
you have open-ended losses and it's
leveraged so you can put a thousand
dollars down
you can get ten
of exposure
and if the thing falls 20 overnight
you've lost your thousand
plus another thousand
like that
and it's open-ended if it goes down
again and you still haven't met your
margin call
you've lost another thousand before you
know it's entirely wiped out and that's
the problem because when you've got when
you borrow
ten times a ten percent fall is wipes
out your initial margin the bet you put
but in the options market it doesn't
because
that premium is all you put in you can't
lose any more
and it can
and it has a time so let's say it's
three months
so even if it falls below and is worth
nothing it's still in existence and
maybe it comes back again three months
later
you're okay still
so it's it's just a different way of
doing
risk
okay so humans are driven by leverage
and sex and
um
so right now we're so what i want people
to understand so
the ultimate question we're going to be
answering in this interview is how we're
going to thrive in this period like what
we can do so we know we're going to take
a kick to the face but you've got the
baron rothschild quote of uh in fact let
me read this is the verbatim quote that
they think was the original so what
everybody knows is by when there's blood
in the streets but the original quote
supposedly was buy when there's blood in
the streets even if the blood is your
own
so
there's this sense of like hey
there's going to be a moment where
everybody else is going to panic we're
living in that moment right now
people are freaking out the euphoria
that we had six months ago has
transitioned into
uh a sort of cynical fearful thing and
so now people are not necessarily
looking for opportunities
and that may cause them to miss a
tremendous moment but for them to find
that moment is going to be
incredibly difficult because when i
heard that quote
my instinct is
by what because you can't just go in
ignorantly and like you know you're in a
strip club and you're you're flipping
money around and that's gonna work out
for you right
you will be in a worse nightmare than
you were if you just waited so we have
to find the right thing to buy
so the question becomes we have to
understand i think you tell me because
lord knows i do not consider myself a
talented investor so
it would seem to me
that what you have to understand is the
macro market what is going on we are as
the the chinese proverb goes may you
live in interesting times which is not
meant in a kind way we are certainly in
interesting times right now so we've got
whatever potential economic crisis is
going on in china they're locking down
now again because they have a zero
covert policy we've got war going on in
europe um we have
potentially a global recession headed
our way we certainly have inflation
maybe it's transitory like you were
saying maybe it's entrenched we're not
sure maybe there's things we can do to
fix it
we've certainly got
humans in here meddling in the market
maybe for better maybe for worse
you've predicted that we've got stemmy
checks coming because
we have this insane
debt going on that is that
largely relegated to boomers or is there
something else
paint paint this macro picture for us
explain to me the debt angle and why
you know that they can't let it implode
and who they are and how they stop it
from imploding okay
so
debt at economic level happens
four different places
one is governments
it's called the deficit you hear this
terminology it's basically how much the
government borrows
so the us government from the people and
foreign entities or is there another way
to borrow yes they'll borrow from people
foreign entities corporations anybody
who wants that rate of interest that
they will give them for it
so you have the us government
you have the u.s households individuals
us
you have
corporations
and you have the financial system
those four
are combined are about 300 and something
percent of gdp ie gdp is the amount of
activity in the economy every year in
dollar terms
and they've borrowed an extraordinary
amount this is the most indebted the us
has ever been
all four of those entities together yes
so we as individuals corporations
government and the financial market have
just gone haywire
and we've borrowed
300 percent over our entire yeah it
might actually be 400 i'm not sure the
exact number right now but
the financial system's not as bad as it
was so they're not the bad guys this
time around they got told off they got
to not don't borrow as much money
the
individuals have not been great but not
terrible
the government borrowed a lot more
and corporations borrowed a lot more so
to put it in perspective
the us
is about 25 percent of the global
economy
yet they have a hundred percent
equivalent of global gdp in debt
so this is the most
indebted economy
in the history of world economics
in terms of
global debt because it's so big
now the u.s is not the only one here
europe's got massive debts japan's got
massive debts so lots and china's got
big debts everyone's got debts
because we borrowed for our future
selves
you know why
why
get enough tax income for the road
system i need to build why not just
issue more bonds and build it now
because the bet is i'll create more
productivity in the future and then gdp
grows and it's easier to pay off and
that generally works okay like the bet
that you took is will my income be able
to cover this debt in future
in most circumstances it is
but what happens is when your debt
becomes so large
and something happens to your income
then you start to say well can i pay
this debt so we talked about that part
the other part is
well everything's backed by collateral
as you mentioned before that's the thing
that you pledge when you take out debt
now if collateral falls too much in
value
somebody taps on the solder and says
that stuff you gave us in exchange for
the money doesn't cover the money
anymore
and then you get this liquidation that
we talked about
this can't happen
on a economic level it can happen to you
and i it can happen to us in our crypto
accounts it can happen to us in our
financial accounts but we can't let it
happen systemically because then
everything goes so we came very close to
the edge
in the u.s and europe in 2008
so much so that the banking system
seized up entirely because the
collateral the house prices
went down
and then the banks were like oh [__] we
don't have enough money against all of
this and then people weren't paying
because we're going to recession
that big doom loop happens
in europe it came we got that but there
was another one in europe which was the
eu crisis this time it wasn't the banks
that were in trouble it was the
governments
italy spain france portugal greece
couldn't pay their debts
and then the that was the really holy
[__] moment
is if whole countries that part of
europe these are big massive nations
can't pay their debts and we're all
[__]
because then that's the whole banking
system gone that's the whole system of
government gone that's everything on so
they stack stop the system by saying
we'll do whatever it takes this was
mario draghi's favorite famous term so
the basically the eu got together
and said we will buy these bonds
to stop them falling
to price in bankruptcy
because
against government bonds as we talked
about it's the risk-free rate
well if it's not risk-free then all of
the other debt that's borrowed on top of
it would have blown up too so how did
they how did they buy that were they
printing more euros correct correct
that's been the answer since 2008
is to print currency to buy bonds which
is
known as currency debasement and this
many purists in the financial markets it
doesn't work that way the mechanism but
it's very clear that this is
basically monetary debasement what
monetary debasement means for anybody
doesn't understand is
is
let's say you're thirsty tom i sell you
a bottle of water
you want to buy it because you're
thirsty so i can charge you five dollars
for it
then let's say i say
well you can't buy one bottle of water
no there's only one bottle of water
around if i say look i've got 20 bottles
of water
well it's it's not that panicky to get
that one bottle
so it might clear it three dollars for
that bottle of water now if i've got a
million
bottles of water what water's worthless
right so the more you create of
something the less value it has
so if there's one picasso it's worth a
fortune
if picasso had made
5 000 of exactly the same painting
they're worth less
so we see that with for example
one-on-ones of warhol versus
warhol's factory where he produced very
similar pieces they're worth less than
the others we say in nft world as well
so scarcity versus abundance so
what you do when you print more money
means there's more money around so it
lowers the value of the money
so that's that's debasing currency so
this is why
they can't let the system go bust
because now there's so much leverage
that everything goes and we saw this in
argentina famous moment in argentina in
2001 i believe it was
called el correlito where the
argentinians
couldn't pay their bills the
government
so what they did is they had this dual
economy the argentinian peso and a
dollar-based peso they just took all the
dollars from the bank accounts and
convert them into pesos
so they got the dollars themselves to
pay their debts but basically
utterly destroyed the peso
and destroyed the economy so much so
that argentina
reverted to barter
it was an extraordinary moment in time
um so that that's the risk the other
time we saw something similar in a more
developed country was cyprus cyprus a
european country
now cyprus
they had
a financial crisis there was too much
debt it was based around property
and so what happens is the banks were
insolvent like they were in the u.s and
like they were in europe
but the answer was the ecb said we're
not bailing you out
so what they did is took any deposit out
of the banking system over a hundred
thousand euros and took it
so it wasn't your money
which is this is what got me into crypto
in the first place once i realized it's
not your money even if it's in a bank
it's not your money
um so these are the
these are the laws of unintended
consequences that happen
if you allow the collateral to go under
if we were less levered like in india
the country's very unlevered it's like
call it 60 of gdp in debt in a
fast-growing economy it's going 10 a
year right that's that's like you taking
the mortgage out and the mortgage isn't
that big and you've got great income
right the probability of you not being
able to pay that debt is very low
so it doesn't matter if indian assets
fall a lot and stuff like that because
there's nothing systemic there you're
not going to destroy the population
but when it's the u.s or europe you
can't allow it you just simply can't
because also part of this is you've got
this huge old population of retired
people or people trying to retire
if you allow the market to clear
then their savings pool disappears
now it's all right for you and i we've
all gone through parts of our career
where we've lost a bunch of money and we
make it back you know you've started
you've created a startup doesn't work
you work hard but you can't do that when
you're 75 years old
what's lost is lost
and then you have to halve your
income or your spending because you've
just lost half your pool of money and
you don't know how long you're going to
live for so this is why there's so much
complexity with old populations lots of
debt
you just can't allow the system to go
under
wow yeah that's uh
that is
really interesting and unnerving at the
same time the interconnectedness of all
of this and then of course it begs the
question what is india doing
that we're not doing is it just
discipline is it lack of opportunity
like
how are they at sixty percent when we're
at three to four because their banking
system didn't really function and they
were more restrictive on their lending
policies
which is a function of their economy
being
more emerging than developed
so people don't want to lend them as
much either because they're more risky
you're like a startup even though
india's obviously a very old thing but
you know in in these terms
um and so and they ran a bit more
inflation than other countries
so
it's really that and they have a culture
of savings
what is up my friend tom bill you here
and i have a big question to ask you how
would you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a 10
i've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
all right i've just released a class
from impact theory university called how
to build ironclad discipline that
teaches you the process of building
yourself up in this area so that you can
push yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
it's because when you're able to borrow
because you're the richest dude in the
street wins the most money which is the
united states
and humans have a propensity
to borrow
to create the image of this future self
the future self was
the amazing united states of america
that dream that we had in the 50s
that dream died decades ago
and to fund
that dream
the mismatch between the dream and the
reality is dead
sometimes debt is not all bad right
sometimes it can help accelerate some of
the things
but if you're doing it to fund a dream
that's never going to exist
that's the danger
all right let's go back then to the so
what defined the american dream
and what killed it
the american dream
that came out in the 50s
was about the wonder
of
economic growth
technology
peace time
and abundance and opportunity for
everybody everybody could be the
president everybody could be rich
that mentality is terrifying because it
creates a misalignment of present self
and future self so everybody feels
like they never got there
this was the whole book fear and
loathing in las vegas by hunters
thompson was basically this
is that's what vegas is about we don't
have gambling in the same way in europe
you can go and gamble it's just not a
big deal but in america it is because
it's about this future expectation of
yourself i think driven by the american
dream and obviously a frontier style
economy and how the us you know
gave birth to itself
so the american dream was set up and the
whole construct was set around it
and then
two bad things happen
one bad thing number one
is everybody goes this is [__]
amazing i want to have kids
right prosperity great time so all of
the people who've gone through the work
the war or maybe two wars had kids
those kids were the baby boomers and
they had too many kids
they
in what way for the planet uh because
for the children themselves
so what happens is
is if two of us go for a job interview
we have a 50 50 chance
if a thousand of you do you have a one
in a thousand chance
so what happens is if too many people
come into the workforce at the same time
they compete with each other
for pr for wages
and if you look back and
inflation-adjust wages
for the average median american or the
average american particularly the median
american over the last
45 years it's not gone up at all
so there's been no productivity growth
the miracle never happened
but in the meantime the price of assets
went up why because there's a whole
bunch of people at the same age who all
want to buy a house at the same time all
want to buy into the stock market at the
same time to stay for their retirement
they pushed up prices
so they got poorer because they couldn't
they didn't own it all
and so the more they tried to buy over
time the more it went up and they got
this massive gap
and that gap between their earnings and
the costs of of assets that you secure
your future income in
kept going up so they borrowed money
and when you when you basically adjust
by asset prices like house prices
versus
wages the difference is the debt
and then the government started doing
the same so it was all driven by the
baby boomers but the baby booms had a
second shock
and a third shock second shock came
really in
the late mid 80s which was computers
computers started competing for jobs
with people
slowly at first
and then faster
and then
1996 the w uh 1999 2000 well 1996 the w
the world trade organization wto
agreed that what a great idea let's all
trade without tariffs with each other
free markets
yeah well the free market actually meant
that when china entered
the global workforce
they would work for a fraction of what
you and i would work for
and so that meant
labor costs never went up
and the cost of goods got cheaper
because china could produce them cheaply
so we just gorged on this stuff because
there's cheap goods we borrowed more
money because we had this future
expectation of ourselves being rich the
american dream and we gorged oil more
money and we borrowed money to see if we
can make money from asset prices so this
whole thing was driven by demographics
and that came out of world war ii so
it's world war ii that drove all of the
mess we're in now and that's the same
globally
was there a baby boom all around the
world
no
the us yes sorry there was a baby boom
everywhere
the difference was
europeans
didn't have
a second baby boom which is the
millennials
the us has the millennials and that's
helped the us economy outperform europe
over time japan didn't have
um millennials either so they're all
older populations the us had the
millennial population so the millennial
population it pops up into the workforce
you know the millennials you know about
four years ago started hitting 30 years
old that that big thing this is a big
bunch of people the problem is they look
into the world their parents are still
in the workforce so they need to compete
with jobs with their parents there's a
whole bunch of them competing with each
other
they all try and go to university to see
if they can get a better job so they
drive up the cost of university
they don't come out of university they
try and buy a house they drive up the
cost of how i mean it's just a mess
when you have these bulges of population
you create all these distortions so
these millennial populations were pretty
screwed
because the their parents had driven up
the price of assets so high trying to
save enough to retire which
never really happened
but they look they come out and say
right i'm earning money now what do i
buy oh the equity market all-time high
valuations the bob market all-time low
yields
property prices are too high to afford
i'm [__]
you know
again all of these are why i got to
crypto
because i knew that i had a different
expected future return because their
parents had known this stuff
and therefore they themselves could help
drive the price up and the adoption as
long as they bought it and owned it
okay so demographics are destiny that
that's something that you hear said a
lot which is um
terrifying i suppose i don't like
anything to be destiny i the idea of the
american dream so going back to what you
were saying about vegas
um that is a fascinating take so
what may have somewhat distorted my view
of all of this is that the american
dream worked for me perfectly
right i i'm a gen xer but why is
everybody watching your show
because they want it to work for them
yeah
so here's here's where we get into
something
really weird so what you and i were
talking about last time is hey i see
this opportunity in crypto which by the
way my thesis is still intact in terms
of that and so i hope that people aren't
panicking
um that they didn't take leverage that
they were slow and steady wins the race
i haven't sold a single satoshi um to
give me a sense of where my head is at
but
raoul the reason that things worked out
for me is really twofold
one i have an obscene work ethic
that makes even myself sometimes
uncomfortable uh there's a jordan
peterson quote that i think is really
insightful which is don't ask why there
aren't more women running fortune 500
companies ask why there are any men at
all
and what he meant by that is it is so
grueling
that why does anybody do it
and since i got into nfts i've been
working for the last eight months at
this point maybe nine i've been working
120 hour weeks
and
even i'm like what am i doing like this
is crazy so that's number one my work
ethic is insane uh number two i believed
it could happen
now you put those two together it does
not necessarily equal a good outcome i
am hyper aware of the role luck has
played in my life
but
if you take either one of those away it
is a guaranteed failure
so
if you don't work hard you are [__] if
you don't believe you can achieve you
won't do the things you need to do to be
successful because why would you it
doesn't make sense if you don't think
it's going to work out and so
while there can be no guarantee of
success
one thing i am really trying to get
people to do is believe that it it
can happen now i will define it
differently as in if you can make
something that people want more than
they want their money then you can be
successful so
let's talk about it in financial term
financial market terms or macro terms
i think there's three things you need to
do here
one income
income rules the world
income pays your bills
income can pay your mortgage income does
everything
without income you got nothing income
takes hard work
it's hard to get up the ladder earn more
income
secondly
is you need to have optionality
you need to have things that can pay off
a startup
or a hobby business on the side can give
you optionality
because you can build a business and a
business has intrinsic value plus it can
increase your income
that will never happen if you work for a
corporation yes you can have a great
career and do fine but you'll never have
that
extra upside that you and i have had by
building businesses
so that is another thing is
is
focus on your income work hard
look for other opportunities that can
leverage that
income and opportunity set that you've
got for you
and then thirdly
is if i've got this income
look for investment opportunities that
can change my life
and that doesn't mean being a degenerate
gambler
it's like
simply put if there is a thesis for
example in cryptocurrency that you and i
share that this is a long-term network
adoption of this incredible technology
that is exponential in nature and highly
volatile
you should be looking at the moments of
extreme weakness the blood on the
streets moment
to be buying more not on leverage but
just putting your money into it
so if you'd have bought a house after
the 2008 crisis you'd have done very
well
if you'd have bought it at the peak
you'll have done less well right so
timing matters
and i looked at this to give you a
specific example just writing a whole
article about this is i went back
with a bit of honesty
thinking
i'm looking at my eth price and i'm
going why didn't i sell it at 3 000 i
should have just you know i could have
bought it back cheaper
and i know that that is a siren song
that goes in your head right mental
torture
and i've been in this space since 2013
so i went back
and looked at my entries and exits and
what i did in the past and what had
happened if i'd just bought and hold and
what had happened if i bought and hold
and added when it was this far oversold
it's very simple
so i figured out that if i'd
i so what i did is i bought in 2013.
200 per bitcoin
it went up to
it it went up to a thousand
sorry
it went up to a thousand
in
six weeks
i was like oh my god but i had a
long-term thesis i wrote the first kind
of macro strategy paper about the
valuation of bitcoin i thought this
could be worth a million dollars and
let's assume i'm an idiot by 90 it's all
worth 100 grand so this is the best bet
i've ever seen
so i
held on and then it fell 82
and i'm like
wow but i taken the bet
and i put money in was not levered and i
could afford to take the bet so i just
thought i'm just going to forget about
this and just see because this is a
longer term thing and you don't normally
make money that fast and doesn't
normally fall this far so let's just see
and then i kind of forgot about it 2014
and then 2015 starts going up again and
then by 2017
i'm now mentally scarred from an 82 drop
coulda woulda shoulda
i then see confusion in the market about
either we're gonna fork bitcoin since
two different chains the price is two
thousand i'm now up tenfold
i'm a genius my macro bet has paid off
sort of
i sell out it goes up to 20 000
and three months later and i don't mind
i don't mind because i've made 10 times
my money
what i did was deviate from my thesis my
thesis was this was a 10 year bet
and i took the money off the table
within five
and then i went back and then obviously
i bought back in
june
may something like that 2020
and had a good run and put more money
into it than i had originally in my
original bet and i worked out that
i had
as opposed to just holding my original
bet
i used a theoretical number
so i think it was if you put 10 grand
into that first bet
it would have been worth
1.4 million well
by doing the right thing buying
reasonably low and selling reasonably
high and you know timing the market
that was a small fraction it was in fact
i think i'd make 20 of what i would have
meant if i held on
and then i went back and looked at okay
well what did i actually do because i
massively increased my position in
in uh in june
i still underperformed by 5x
and then i'm like okay what happens if
i've done the right thing what i should
have done which was my framework which
was you buy it when people when it's on
sale when there's blood in the streets
so i went back and looked at the
the bottoms of the bear markets assumed
i'm an idiot and i can't catch the
bottom of bear market and miss it by 30
percent
and just put the same amount in each
time that i started with
that 1.4 million
would have been 30.
why sorry not 30 sorry three
lord
had i rolled my profits in
you know had i just
doubled down each time or whatever the
numbers go exponentially larger
and that really stopped me in my tracks
it's like here's me doing the right
thing
you know buying when it's in a
bull market selling when it's in a too
strong a bull market buying when it's
down a bit and i still didn't do as well
as just holding it
and
i if i just added to it i would have
done well and my framework is this is a
long-term trend right we've got at least
another decade in this at least
probably two or three decades but this
part of it is going to continue to do
very well sure bitcoin over time as it
gets more users more adopted it won't go
up as much each cycle
but there'll be plenty of others and
plenty of
opportunities so what we should be doing
is using this thinking of the money you
put in as your retirement money
and writing it off
um and then just adding
if you've got money
in a bear market now the problem is is
most of us don't in a recession
but a friend of mine taught me very
early on he said
rel is a key thing i've learned is he
who has cash in a recession is king
so that's that combination of income
and opportunity you've got income you've
got some cash and now everything's on
fire sell prices
you're the king
so what what do we learn about the
psychology
through all of this because this really
feels like a psychology game and i'm i'm
really glad that this has happened
quickly so for me i've been in crypto
for less than two years
and
i have seen now
even in that time sort of multiple like
oh it's all over no we're back no it's
all over
and so
watching the whiplash of how people feel
act
talk even like what where i go from
feeling like i am so smart like this is
insane
to
ooh
like is this really gonna play out like
the level of
doubt where
to your point i just have to turn off my
brain i'm like i'm not gonna think about
it i was perfectly willing when it was
up i was like if it went to zero i would
be fine so i'm like if that's really
true
then
chill
you're fine like you know just let it do
what it's gonna do and if you were lucky
enough like you and i to have bought
slightly earlier in the cycle
then for goodness sake don't look at
your loss of wealth from peak
that's stupid that's the american dream
fixating on something that doesn't exist
think okay fine i'm still i'm still in
i'm probably still up
don't think oh my net worth's down 50
this is the end of the what no that's
not how it works
how it works is you need to be in it to
win it and you can't be in it to win it
if you've got leverage
or if you're out of the market
and so if if you say to me well you know
that's difficult for people
sure then put less in
it's as simple as that you get to the
point where you can sleep at night then
you've got the right size bet
and once you have made money and it's
compounded
then don't look at it from the peak to
trough so one of the tricks i've learnt
with myself in a slightly different
thing is wine
i i love wine
and wine good wine is expensive
but it's a lot cheaper if you buy it
early when it comes out
so i bought and i've just taken a
delivery of stuff i bought 15 years ago
now what i do is this little mental
trick which is i write off everything i
pay for wine when i buy it because i
don't see the wine for 15 years so why
do i care whoa and so mentally it's gone
to zero
so now i'm able to drink wine which i
would never open
because i haven't paid for it i kind of
like i wrote it off
and it's really helpful to use mental
tricks on yourself to stop yourself
doing things you shouldn't be doing
which is selling at the low buying at
the high or you know buying a bunch of
wine and then not being able to drink it
and you actually buy it to drink i don't
sell wine but if i
if i did i would have just sold all my
wine i've never have tasted amazing
wines it's
it's these mental tricks we have to play
it's interesting you mentioned earlier
the siren song of you know looking at
like oh my god if i had sold at that
point like i would be so much farther
ahead than i am now it's interesting
that you use the siren song so for
people that don't know the mythology
there were these sirens supposedly that
would call to men they would sing this
incredible song and the men would want
to hear it more so they would sail the
ship closer and they would crash and so
the sirens were intentionally trying to
get you to
ruin yourself basically
and in this story the solution isn't to
develop the willpower in order to resist
the siren song his whole thing was tie
me to the mast so that i can't move all
of you block out the sound so that no
matter what i say you don't listen to me
and i can enjoy the the sound of it
without being able to take action on it
so basically you have to find a mental
trick in order to deal with it your
the lashing you to the the rail is to
write off the wine so that you can enjoy
it when you get it and then right off
the investments i've got in
in crypto
and then i observe the sentiment i
observe the sirens i hear the song but
they don't affect me
well they obviously do affect you but
you you you try not to let it affect you
as much you distance yourself from price
action
because your theory is
that it's going to go from here to a lot
further over time that keyword is over
time and we've all said all of us have
said and we know it does this a lot on
the way
so then if you know that it's a no known
why the hell when it happens
do people forget it's so funny when when
bitcoin and eth crashed
last year
fell 50 odd 55 from the high
i suspect my wife and i'm like god
everybody's freaking out you know and
she's like wow what's happened i said
well it's down 50 she said
but you said that's normal
and her exact word so just shut the [__]
up you should be buying here not
freaking out i'm like yeah true
you have to remind yourself
yeah like this is a two-part process if
you want to succeed so going back to
answering the fundamental question that
we're here to answer how do you thrive
in a time like this so one you have to
have the understanding of the market the
macro trends all of that to know what to
buy
and then you have to have the
psychological resilience that even
though you feel it to your point like i
feel
that we're down and it does not feel
good
but it hasn't changed my behavior
and so because the thesis is still
intact
yes and so let's look at other
opportunities so maybe not everybody
likes crypto another thing that is
patently obvious is technology is not
going away
now it's not easy to pick the right
technology stocks much like it's
difficult to pick the right nfts or
tokens unless you really know what
you're doing and or you
yeah you know that particular company or
that project
but if the thesis is that technology is
going to continue to have this
ridiculous adoption whether it's ai ev
whether it's robotics whether it's
genetic sciences all of these things
that are around us space travel
well then if it's being sold
in a fire sale
because everybody's panicking
well surely that makes sense because
technology has outperformed the market
for the last 40 years
so you always want to be buying
technology so if you're thinking of your
401k
europe you know you're in your 30s you
look at your 401k and you've still got
your income because that's the most
important thing of everything you've got
your income you should be going okay i
should be buying
technology stocks and i should be buying
crypto because these are long term mega
trends
now is there so we're living in a very
particular moment but one thing i like
about ray dalio is his idea of this is
another one of those
is this like another time is there
something that we can learn from
historical trends that we could be
applying to our investment thesis now
so the investment thesis i don't
believe
so necessarily there's a lot of macro
similarities with the past past episodes
and everybody makes it
very dramatic there tends to be a lot of
doom porn and i've been a proponent of
that as well you know everything looks
like the 1929 crash everything looks
like we're going to go to world war ii
everything looks like you know it's 2001
all over again
yes
those things happen
but
things go on
and if you bought tech stocks after 2001
crash
you'd be very very wealthy indeed
if you think of jeff bezos
he launched amazon bright-eyed and
bushy-tailed has his ipo
it explodes in price everyone's like oh
amazing online bookseller it then falls
96 percent
right so this is exactly what
um i went through in crypto exactly the
same
and then what happened is well unlike
most of his investors he held on
and it went up a lot again still didn't
make up the high it fell another 80
percent it went up again it then fell 60
and then before you know it this online
bookseller was suddenly worth more than
all the book selling companies in the
world added together and it was still
trading at a price earnings ratio of
like 800 everyone's like this is crazy
this is a bubble but what we didn't
realize is
he was building a network
this network for e-commerce
and then the computing power that drives
it
you know and so
over time amazon just did that
and these are the things you need to
think about in this is where are we in
the volatility and is this going to
survive those are the two questions and
if the long-term trend
is there
then you should be buying into all of
this
what are the smartest people buying
right now anything are they sitting in
cash are they moving on something or
there is a lot for us there's a lot of
cash so i have my global macro investor
roundtable which is a bunch of my
subscribers from my kind of very high
institutional research service a bunch
of the world's most famous hedge funds
family offices asset management firms
and we all have this little enclave here
in the cayman islands with a lot of wine
and a lot of discussion and trade ideas
and stuff like that
and
generally people are a lot in cash
the real estate
developer guys you know the kind of
wealthy guys who were in real estate as
their primary thing a lot of them had
sold quite a lot
um
then
the
the hedge fund guys
were
very concerned about recession but we're
looking
and so they were buying
let's call it cash bonds cash anything
to kind of just not be involved in risky
assets like stocks and stuff
but they were looking for the
opportunity for the other side which is
what what is that opportunity and that
opportunity was
technology
crypto
and
commodities
commodities have gone up a lot recently
but we've got this um it's this greening
thing that's going on right
we're going to green the world
we have the political willpower to do it
and it's going to happen faster than the
market can take
and that means we under invest
in
mining stuff
and we over invest in
battery technology
wind farm solar farms right and the idea
is eventually
you accelerate this so much that it
becomes the adopted technology and
electricity becomes cheaper from doing
it
the issue is there's not enough copper
for the electricity we need to generate
so we're about to go into this enormous
copper shortage you don't notice it now
because the economy is weakening and so
less people demanding copper but once we
come through the other side of this
you're going to have this huge demand
for copper and it's a problem
but it's part of that green energy
transition green energy transition also
is going to require a lot of other stuff
to build these wind farms these solar
farms the hydrogen power that you know
and whether we go to atomic energy or
whatever it is it's a whole change in
how the world works it's very similar to
the 1950s when we kind of rebuilt
america factories and all of that kind
of stuff
so
that moment in time means that these
guys wanted both commodities and
technology
um
because they know this one's probably
kind of a good five or ten year cycle
and the technology cycle is limitless
right now
so that's i guess what most people were
thinking but everyone was very nervous
over this next three-month period about
what happens to the economy what could
happen to markets
so what signals are they looking for i'm
assuming everybody going into cash is
thinking okay blood is in the streets
but i'm not yet sure which way things
are going whether i've got the timing
right
but i imagine there are certain signals
that they're looking for so if it's
copper and we're looking for that
transitionary moment or are they buying
it now like what are the
um what are the signs that they will
look for to go in on something so
we talked about
income plus opportunity
so they've got the cash so you know one
of the world's best
technology invest investors co2 i think
that's 70 cash
whoa
which is extraordinary because these
guys are you know they're aggressive
technology investors 70 cash there's a
whole bunch of people who are
so what they're saying is the future
opportunity
is going to be big
and it's going to be cheaper than it is
today
now will they time it properly well et
cetera doesn't really matter but here's
what the smartest people are saying is
the future opportunities better than the
present opportunity
so that's a little scary though because
that means prices are going to go down
further
well we don't know when they had that
bet they might have done that four
months ago in which case has been a very
good bet and they've been looking to
deploy
if i read their investor letter they say
they're now starting to look to deploy
stuff into interesting
opportunities where things are really
cheap which is the thing i said before
when the market throws out the baby with
the bath water
that's when you start finding the things
you really like you know in crypto world
things like solana great project down 85
percent there's a whole bunch of these
big layer ones with network adoption
effects already these are not
super speculative assets that obviously
speculative risky but not super risky
they're all down 80 85
okay that becomes interesting
so
i look at the world as not a macro
investor i still see a hyper amount of
uncertainty and i want everybody if this
is your first time watching me i do not
consider myself a talented investor i
have always um considered myself to be
focused on learning how to make money
and that's where i've been successful
investing money is is a big question
mark and i'm exploring that
um
but i look at the level of uncertainty
right now and i am deeply gravely
concerned
about where we're going uh when i look
at what's going on in russia and the
ukraine that obviously gives me pause
but really more so
china potentially going after taiwan
if that is um
has said that part of his legacy is
going to be the reunification of china
he's already got hong kong
taiwan becomes the obvious next move
uh which is you know super
nerve-wracking
are there big things like that on your
mind to like hit the pause button to
wait to see how they play out or
does that not strike you as a big
concern
um yes always obviously and you know
being a macro guy you're endlessly
reassessing the odds of different
outcomes all the time and there's
multiple outcomes it's not like i go
this is the outcome and i'm assessing
the odds it's like well could this
happen could this happen could this
happen is something changing that's what
you're doing all the time
so
we know that there is the global economy
is splitting regionally that
there's a bunch of
let's go back the u.s dollar the u.s
economy is 25 of the world economy
it's as we said a huge amount of the
world debts 100 of gdp in debt the real
problem is
80 of all trade transactions on earth
are in dollars
so the us is 25 of the economy but
dictates 87 percent of everything else
that happens
when the dollar goes up the dollar goes
down
everybody pays the price
if the dollar interest rates go up
everybody pays the price and everyone's
kind of had enough of it
it was known as the global reserve
currency but it's too
big
as a percentage of the global economy in
china europe everybody said we need to
change this
and obviously
having
control over money is power
so the chinese want to create regional
power
and that will happen
virtually no way we can stop it
and it's a matter of
how you accept it and how and
by what manner do you want to go to
kinetic warfare with them or do we just
continue with cyber warfare and
geopolitical struggles which has been
the way of you know our relationship
with russia our relationship with china
for a long time
i don't think anybody wants to go to
kinetic war
just see what happened in the ukraine
nobody did anything
what they did was we'll sanction you
and we'll give you some weapons
but there is a war in the heart of
europe
and nato didn't do anything
because they don't because the outcome
of getting involved was bigger
than getting involved
so
so let me ask then
what is china going to do to force so if
the whole world wants there to be a
balance that the us making up 87
of global transactions is not something
that they're willing to do anymore
is it that china starts building a um a
consortium of people that are going to
denominate in the yuan is that how this
plays out we don't know yet obviously
they'd like it but it's not ready
because they've got what's known as a
closed capital account which meaning
people can't get money out and in easily
so if you think what china did they did
something called the one belt one road
policy so they basically went around the
world and found a bunch of people who
were desperate for money and said we'll
give you money in exchange for us being
able to have some of your natural
resources or your access to your ports
now that hasn't been the most successful
strategy but it's in place and china's
footprint across africa
um
some of europe all over even down to the
caribbean
um south america is all over the place
from this one belt one road
so there was trading power that they
created they then created
leverage on it because if i lend you
money you
i own you so that's what they did
and then they
formed a
like a i think it was called the east
asia or the asian investment bank which
was an idea to create like an
international monetary fund for a bunch
of countries in east asia and asia
overall
to try and think about
separating out these worlds where
china's the dominant trade partner for
asia so why should the us dollar be used
i get that point why should it
um
so
they've started splitting that up
then the next phase in what happened i
think was
when the us
and the west essentially froze russian
central bank
assets
they basically said the same as cyprus
said which is
your money is not your money
so if you're china you understand that
is now a win click a weak link
so if you want taiwan
and again i'm not geopolitical guy
really but it makes logical sense if you
want taiwan what you need to do is
distangle yourself from the global
system we're already splitting up supply
chains to detangle these two groups
because
they want to separate they're going to
get divorced
so they're trying to just sort out their
financial affairs move apart
and then
china could then think about this so
they need to separate themselves
financially
economically
and then you can have taiwan and then
that's how that's how it that's the way
it seems to be moving and it hasn't
really deviated from that path for a
long time
do you think it's fair to call this a
deglobalization
um
i think we have a tendency to look at
everything through western eyes
what it is is a change of the
global order system
and
yeah there's a great book called the
fourth turning i think i've recommended
it before everybody should read it this
is the full turning it's exactly what's
happening and that's not like
geopolitical doom and gloom it's
actually driven by demographics and the
changes in the opportunities and the
threats that happen over it
but what we're doing is we're moving
away from an old system into a new
system
and i don't think it's going to be a
one currency system
i think we'll just regionalize
is that the end of the world no we've
been to many times in worlds like this
before
so
people think of it as cataclysmic
because it's changed from what we know
but really
is somebody in
indonesia better or worse off if they
don't use the us dollar
better off
you know are they better to borrow and
lend money with their main trading
partner which would be china better off
so
it's going to happen and it's just
spitting apart now does it end up in two
economic zones or three or does somebody
try and
build an alliance of a globalized
currency
which is something that's been talked
about the bancore idea something that
better reflects global trade
maybe too i don't know but change is
happening
and you can fear it
you're not gonna stop it
yeah that's really interesting uh one
way to look at this is is a way that is
a media guy i think about this a lot is
there's this constant
movement in media where there's money to
be made in grouping things together and
then there's money to be made and
decoupling them and then there's money
to be made and bringing them back
together and then decoupling them and so
it'll be interesting to see if we start
seeing on a long enough timeline this
sort of globalization de-globalization
globalization de-globalization well
that's don't forget when the when the
the brits were the predominant power
in the late 1800s
early 1900s just before world war one
the world was
pretty much the most globalized it had
ever been
well world war one and two got rid of
that
and then it created another
re-globalization
which was the rise of the us
and now we go to a deglobalization
these things are kind of normal
now how fractured do we get does europe
fracture into you know
into different
regions does spain fracture into
different countries does the us is that
on the table
oh yeah i mean the catalans want to
separate the basques want to separate
you know
we see this all over
those could happen or they may not
happen
but over
geopolitical time spans
they will happen because it's always
happened
you know italy wasn't a country
and we forget this we just we look at
present state and assume that's the same
so these things do move
but
it sells a lot of newspapers and
eyeballs and attention span to worry
over it
and most of the time you shouldn't
most of the time the opportunity is
there and we want to worry about the
existential crisis it's very human again
one of those human traits is
go back and read literature over the
millennia it's always about
we're all gonna die
it's just
it's a survival instinct within humans
it's like we're all gonna die oh my god
everything's terrible
and
yes
it is terrible and it can be terrible if
you're living in the ukraine now
it's absolutely [__] awful
but as all of those people who came out
of world war ii who end up having kids
things do go on
things do change over time
and so always out of bad times
eventually these are good times and it's
the same with investing
that cycle
is pretty common
and it's a very human trait
so
as you you had this big forum you know
where um different people are
deploying their capital to what are you
doing are you waiting for a given
opportunity are you
um still deploying on a
dollar cost averaging basis into crypto
what's your strategy right now see i i
haven't dollar cost average generally
because you know i spent 30 years in
financial markets so i
i think
hubristically that i can time them a bit
better
so you know i have bought into big
sell-offs and i'm kind of cleaning up my
portfolio sorting it out getting ready
to do that
um to try and add as much as i can
crypto specifically or into crypto
specifically but i've also been buying
technology stocks for the same reasons
and
i don't really care about yeah i i've
owned bonds
as a trade because bonds once the
economy weakens bonds tend to go up in
price
so people you can trade things like the
tlt and they go up when yields fall so
you can make some profits from doing
that
um but generally speaking
i've been looking at these two mega
themes because i really believe in them
and you know meanwhile as as we what we
talked about i'm increasing my
optionality by building businesses so
you know i built an asset management
business in the crypto industry so it's
um called exponential age asset
management and we the first product we
launched is a funder funds investing in
crypto hedge funds to allow people like
you and i to stay in the trade and not
spook ourselves out and give it to
experts as it gets more complicated so
building that business i've built
another business co-founded
called science magic studios it's not
really announced so a lot of people will
see this for the first time science
magic studios exactly it's called
science magic studios it's a token
studio that advises it it tokenizes the
world's largest cultural economies so
that's massive
um
music stars
sports
fashion
movie tv and book franchises those are
the four kind of verticals we look at
and as opposed to exactly sorry what do
you do exactly
so we have so this is a um a jv between
myself delphi digital kevin kelly is a
co-founder and a very good friend of
mine who kind of grew up together who
was the ceo of the guardian newspaper
group he's he's got another business
called science magic inc which is a the
kind of nexus between
influencers
brands
and community
so when he was building that business i
said look what we're missing is tokens
so we put this together we've got some
of the world's most amazing investors
on our cap table and incredible advisors
it's a ludicrous group so
sciencemagicstudios.xyz
and so
that team
builds the entire strategy and execution
for tokenizing entire economies so
that's from nfts so if you think about
how bulldape yacht club did it
so or yuga labs did it more specifically
which was you know they started with
nfts they start building community they
add other communities they build on and
then they have a social token around it
and experiences
um that's the hard way the easy way is
if you've already got 100 million fans
that's wow that's really interesting i
didn't know that you were getting into
that um yeah that's why he's talking so
much about this i've been working on
this for a long time and you know a
couple of the the
i mean fingers crossed but the first two
that we do will be some of the biggest
things ever attempted in web 3.
um so we'll see what are your thoughts
on regulation
um
you know we know regulation you have to
figure out how to do this you know
air dropping let the market set the
price and it's all about utility it has
to be utility and not speculation
if it's speculation then it's a security
it has to be about
creating a kind of digital economy where
tokens have utility and scarcity
for
for that community and if you guys
engage with regulators or are you just
reading the tea leaves
um no i mean we have some of the world's
best law firms working with us and stuff
like that um so you know there's a lot
of these that already exist obviously
these token economies um and it's
slowly slowly slowly catchy monkey you
can't
go rushing into because the size of
these things i mean one of the projects
is has a reach of
1.3 billion people whoa
yeah and so
are you able to talk about it i'm so
curious
when when is it supposed to launch
without one launch yet we're just
finalizing that that
this stuff takes time because you have
to go small
nobody needs to know what you're doing
you kind of develop it and then build it
out into a much larger ecosystem so
we'll see but that's just very early
stage we're still hiring the final
people on that so that's the investment
in myself real vision i'm retooling
towards
um
not entirely towards but putting these
macro and crypto worlds together
which you and i've talked about in the
past because i passionately believe
they're all part of the same thing and
this is a huge opportunity set so um
doing that buying the other stuff and
trying to make sure i maintain income
because without income you're [__]
that is amazing all right perfect place
to end and one more thing that we are
doing that i think will be super
relevant to this conversation
we have for a long time like you had a
big belief that you know part of the
democratization of financial information
intelligence that we do at real vision
our mission
is education
and education finance is pretty crappy
or you get overcharged by people who are
nobodies creating education
and as you and i have shown in this
conversation there's a lot to get to
know you have to understand this stuff
you can't just pretend
and i want to make sure that people have
the opportunity
to get confidence in their own investing
the thing that even you think about is
like am i a good investor can i be a
good investor right yes everybody can
with the right tools
so we have been for a year and a half
been building something at real vision
which is going to be amazing using the
world's most famous investors to help
mentor people
through all the aspects of investing we
have some courses
um programming everything for all of
this um we're just about to launch it so
if you go to realvision.com forward
slash waitlist it'll come with stupid
cheap prices to start but we're even
going to disrupt the pricing of what
this is done because a proper course
cost a lot of money this is not this is
something quite groundbreaking
it's amazing man the content you put out
is really really extraordinary i know i
am super grateful for it super grateful
for your time thank you again so much
for coming on i educate myself to death
uh whenever you and i get a chance to to
talk so
uh to me i love it as always i really
enjoy the conversations nah sam all
right everybody speaking of things you
will love if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be a legendary take care peace
we saw an opportunity uh to plug into
a graphical interface
and
the idea was give computer simulations
to executives to predict the future